docs: Add layer configuration documentation (#85)
KhronosGroup/Vulkan-Utility-Libraries: docs/layer_configuration.md

Reviewer: Will this PR also address https://github.com/KhronosGroup/Vulkan-ValidationLayers/issues/4667 ?

Author: Kind of, I think that pretty much independent, I created a PR: https://github.com/KhronosGroup/Vulkan-ValidationLayers/pull/6523

<!--
Copyright 2023 The Khronos Group Inc.
Copyright 2023 Valve Corporation
Copyright 2023 LunarG, Inc.

SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0
-->

[![Khronos Vulkan][1]][2]

[1]: https://vulkan.lunarg.com/img/Vulkan_100px_Dec16.png "https://www.khronos.org/vulkan/"
[2]: https://www.khronos.org/vulkan/

# Layers Configuration

[![Creative Commons][3]][4]

[3]: https://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nd/4.0/88x31.png "Creative Commons License"
[4]: https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nd/4.0/

Vulkan supports intercepting or hooking API entry points via a layer framework. A layer can intercept all or any subset of Vulkan API entry points. Multiple layers can be chained together to cascade their functionality in the appearance of a single, larger layer.

> Vulkan layers give Vulkan application developers the ability to add additional functionality to applications without modifying the application itself, e.g., validating API usages, dumping API entry points or generating screenshots of specified frames.

Reviewer 2: Please (don't) laugh at my english remarks. I use grammarly. The suggestions are not necessarily better (until noted otherwise), use them only if you like them.

`add additional` maybe a bit of repetition. Alternative: _Vulkan layers allow application developers to add functionality to Vulkan applications without modifying the application itself_.

In the original sentence there could be a comma before "or".

Author: updated

> Vulkan layers can be configured using three different methods to match specific Vulkan developers workflows:

Reviewer 2: nit: `developers'` - possessive form?

Author: oh absolutely no idea. Updating.

> - Using the Vulkan API: `VkCreateInstance()` and `VK_EXT_layer_settings`.

Reviewer 2: `vkCreateInstance` - lowercase v

- Using the `vk_layer_settings.txt` file, that can be generated by the GUI interface called *[Vulkan Configurator](https://vulkan.lunarg.com/doc/sdk/latest/windows/vkconfig.html)*.
- Using environment variables.

These three methods are implemented by the **Vulkan Layer Settings** library part of the *[Vulkan-Utility-Libraries](https://github.com/KhronosGroup/Vulkan-Utility-Libraries)* repository.

> Any layer project including this library will provide these three methods to control layer settings bringing consistency and easy of use of layers to the Vulkan community.

Reviewer 2: > Any layer project including this library will provide these three methods

I read this as "Any layer project and also this library will provide..." which might be not the intention. 

Alternative: _Any layer project that uses this library_

Author: Fixed

Configuring layers means multiple tasks: Enabling layers; Ordering layers; Configuring the layers capabilities. These three aspects are described with each method to configure layers.

A single setting can be configure using all three methods simulanously. A convention defines priorities regarding the different layer settings methods:
1. The environment variable which overrides
2. The vk_layer_settings.txt value which overrides

> 3. The `VK_EXT_layer_settings` value of a layer setting.

Author: Ok!

## Configuring Vulkan Layers using the *Vulkan API*

### Enabling and ordering the layer using `vkCreateInstance()`

Applications may programmatically activate layers via the `vkCreateInstance()` entry point. This
is done by setting `enabledLayerCount` and `ppEnabledLayerNames` in the `VkInstanceCreateInfo`
structure.

The layer names order in `ppEnabledLayerNames` specifies the layers execution ordering from closer to the Vulkan application to closer
to the Vulkan driver.

### Configuring the layer settings using `VK_EXT_layer_settings`

Layer settings may be configured using the `VK_EXT_layer_settings` extension by initializing the `VkLayerSettingsCreateInfoEXT` structure and chaining it to the `pNext` of `VkInstanceCreateInfo` when creating a Vulkan instance.

> ### Code example

Reviewer: To keep the example simple I'd just use the validation layers. Using the validation layers and profiles complicates the example making it harder to follow.

If you feel it valuable to show how to set multiple layers I'd make another example.

Author: Ok, I updated all the examples to use the validation layer, and actually configuring it the same way with the different method.

I also used the profiles layer to express the layer ordering in the exemple.

```cpp
    const char* profile_file_data = JSON_TEST_FILES_PATH "VP_LUNARG_desktop_baseline_2023.json";
    const char* profile_name_data = "VP_LUNARG_desktop_baseline_2023";
    const VkBool32 emulate_portability_data = VK_TRUE;
    const char* simulate_capabilities[] = {"SIMULATE_FEATURES_BIT", "SIMULATE_PROPERTIES_BIT", "SIMULATE_EXTENSIONS_BIT"};

    const VkLayerSettingEXT settings[] = {

>         {kLayerName, kLayerSettingsProfileFile, VK_LAYER_SETTING_TYPE_STRING_EXT, 1, &profile_file_data},

Reviewer 2: Suggestion to provide example values for k-Constants like `kLayerName`, so the user understands it's not the constants from the library.

Author: Fixed

    const VkApplicationInfo app_info = {
        VK_STRUCTURE_TYPE_APPLICATION_INFO, nullptr,
        "profiles_tests", VK_MAKE_API_VERSION(0, 1, 0, 0),
        "profiles_tests", VK_MAKE_API_VERSION(0, 1, 0, 0),
        VK_API_VERSION_1_3
    };

    const char* layers[] = {
        "VK_LAYER_KHRONOS_validation", "VK_LAYER_KHRONOS_profiles"
    };

    const VkInstanceCreateInfo inst_create_info = {
        VK_STRUCTURE_TYPE_INSTANCE_CREATE_INFO, &layer_settings_create_info, 0,
        &app_info,
        static_cast<uint32_t>(std::size(layers)), layers,
        0, nullptr
    };

    VkInstance instance = VK_NULL_HANDLE;
    VkResult result = vkCreateInstance(&inst_create_info, nullptr, &instance);
```

## Configuring Vulkan Layers using *Vulkan Configurator*

Developers can configure layers through a graphical user interface. *Vulkan Configurator* allows full user control of Vulkan layers, including enabling or disabling specific layers, controlling layer order, changing layer settings, etc.
*Vulkan Configurator* configures the layers by applying a global system configuration of the Vulkan loader and creating a vk_layer_settings.txt file that will be find by any layer.

> *Vulkan Configurator* can be used using command line to setup the system environment. Use the commannd `vkconfig --help` for more information in this case.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*Vulkan Configurator* can be used using command line to setup the system environment. Use the command `vkconfig --help` for more information in this case.
```

Author: Fixed

> We recommand the using *Vulkan Configurator* GUI approach for Vulkan application developers, it's the most effectively approach to switch between multiple layers configurations and quickly iterate during the development process.

Reviewer 2: typo: recommand -> recommend

Author: What a mess, thanks!

> Additionally, *Vulkan Configurator* presents to the Vulkan application developers the layers found on the system and the settings of each layers, allowing Vulkan application developers to discover new fonctionnalities from the GUI without having to dig into each layer documentation.

Reviewer 2: of each layers -> of each layer
fonctionnalities -> functionality

Author: Fixed

### Enabling and ordering the layer with the override layer file (`VkLayer_override.json`)

> To control the enabled layers and the layer order, *Vulkan Configurator* is generating the `VkLayer_override.json` file which is consumed by the Vulkan loader to enable Vulkan layers and control the order of the layers. This file also store the user-defined paths specified in *Vulkan Configurator* to find additional layers.

Reviewer 2: is generating -> generates
comma before "which"

#### The override layer file on Linux and macOS

Unix systems store override layer file in the following paths:

- `$HOME/.local/share/vulkan/implicit_layer.d/VkLayer_override.json`

#### The override layer file on Windows

Windows systems store the override layer file in the following path:

- `%HOME%\AppData\Local\LunarG\vkconfig\override\VkLayerOverride.json`

### Configuring the layers using the settings file (`vk_layer_settings.txt`)

To control the layer settings, *Vulkan Configurator* is generating the `vk_layer_settings.txt` file which is consumed by the Vulkan layers and set the setting values defined by the Vulkan developers using the UI.

> By default, the **Vulkan Layer Settings** library requires the settings file to be named `vk_layer_settings.txt` and it will search it in the working directory of the targeted application. Hence, if a file is found in the working directory of the targeted application, the **Vulkan Layer Settings** library will by pass the layer settings created by *Vulkan Configurator*.

Reviewer 2: by pass -> bypass

If `VK_LAYER_SETTINGS_PATH` is set and is a directory, then the settings file must be a file called `vk_layer_settings.txt` in the directory given by `VK_LAYER_SETTINGS_PATH`.
If `VK_LAYER_SETTINGS_PATH` is set and is not a directory, then it must point to a file (with any name) which is the layer settings file.

The settings file can be modified or fully hand-written by the Vulkan application developers or third party tools. The settings file consists of comment lines and settings lines. Comment lines begin with the `#` character. Settings lines have the following format:

   `<`*`LayerName`*`>.<`*`setting_name`*`> = <`*`setting_value`*`>`

> The settings and values available for each layer are listed in the layer manifest and the documentation of each layer using **Vulkan Layer Settings** library to implement layer settings.

Reviewer 2: Not sure about the meaning of the part about documentation, some clarification might be helpful.

Author: Clearily a problem happen here. \o/ Fixed

Windows systems store the layer setting file in the following path:

- `%HOME%\AppData\Local\LunarG\vkconfig\override\vk_layer_settings.txt`

## Configuring Vulkan Layers using Environment Variables

### Finding Vulkan Layers

In order to enable a Vulkan layer from the command-line, you must first make sure:

  1. The layer's Manifest JSON file is found by the Vulkan Desktop Loader because it is in:
      * One of the standard operating system install paths
      * It was added using one of the layer path environment variables (`VK_LAYER_PATH` or `VK_ADD_LAYER_PATH`).
      * See the `Layer Discovery` section of the Vulkan Loader's [Layer Interface doc](https://github.com/KhronosGroup/Vulkan-Loader/blob/main/docs/LoaderLayerInterface.md).
  2. The layer's library file is able to be loaded by the Vulkan Desktop Loader because it is in:
      * A standard library path for the operating system
      * The library path has been updated using an operating system-specific mechanism such as:
          * Linux: adding the path to the layer's library .so with `LD_LIBRARY_PATH`
          * MacOS: adding the path to the layer's library .dylib with `DYLD_LIBRARY_PATH` 

>   3. The layer's library file is compiled for the same target and bitdepth (32 vs 64) as the application

Reviewer 2: bitdepth -> bitness

Author: Are you sure about this? This is from the original file

Reviewer 2: not sure. bitness is more common for arch and bitdepth is for color, but since it was used in original documentation I guess that’s correct too.

#### Activating Specific SDK Layers

To activate layers located in a particular SDK installation, or layers built locally from source, specify the layer JSON
manifest file directory using either `VK_LAYER_PATH` or `VK_ADD_LAYER_PATH`.
The difference between `VK_LAYER_PATH` and `VK_ADD_LAYER_PATH` is that `VK_LAYER_PATH` overrides the system layer paths
so that no system layers are loaded by default unless their path is added to the environment variable.
`VK_ADD_LAYER_PATH` on the otherhand, causes the loader to search the additional layer paths listed in the
environment variable first, and then the standard system paths will be searched.

#### Example Usage On Windows:

For example, if a Vulkan SDK is installed in `C:\VulkanSDK\1.2.198.0`, execute the following in a Command Window:

```

> C:\> set VK_LAYER_PATH=C:\VulkanSDK\1.2.198.0\Bin

Reviewer: This is a really old SDK. Worth updating to latest stable.

Author: Update...

```

#### Example Usage on Linux

For Linux, if Vulkan SDK 1.2.198.0 was locally installed in `/sdk` and `VULKAN_SDK=/sdk/1.2.198.0/x86_64`:

```
$ export VK_LAYER_PATH=$VULKAN_SDK/lib/vulkan/layers
$ export LD_LIBRARY_PATH=$VULKAN_SDK/lib:$VULKAN_SDK/lib/vulkan/layers
```

#### Example Usage on MacOS

For macOS, if Vulkan SDK 1.2.198.0 was locally installed in `/sdk` and `VULKAN_SDK=/sdk/1.2.198/macOS`:

```
$ export VK_LAYER_PATH=$VULKAN_SDK/share/vulkan/explicit_layers.d
$ export DYLD_LIBRARY_PATH=$VULKAN_SDK/lib
```

### Enabling and ordering Vulkan Layers

Originally, the Vulkan Desktop Loader provided `VK_INSTANCE_LAYERS` to enable layers from the command-line.
However, starting with the Vulkan Loader built against the 1.3.234 Vulkan headers, the `VK_LOADER_LAYERS_ENABLE` environment
variable was added to allow for more easily enabling Vulkan layers.
The newer Loaders will continue to accept the original `VK_INSTANCE_LAYERS` environment variable for some time, but it is
considered deprecated.

#### Vulkan 1.3.234 Loader and Newer (`VK_LOADER_LAYERS_ENABLE`)

> The easiest way to enable a layer with a more recent drop of the Vulkan Loader is using the `VK_LOADER_LAYERS_ENABLE

Reviewer 2: right highlighter for VK_LOADER_LAYERS_ENABLE is missing

Author: fixed

the layers to load.

For example, previously if you wanted to enable the Api Dump layer and the Validation layer, you would have to set
`VK_INSTANCE_LAYERS` equal to the full name of each layer:

```
VK_INSTANCE_LAYERS=VK_LAYER_LUNARG_api_dump;VK_LAYER_KHRONOS_validation
```

Now, with `VK_LOADER_LAYERS_ENABLE`, you simply can use stars where you don't want to fill in the full name:

```
VK_LOADER_LAYERS_ENABLE=*api_dump,*validation
```

##### Example Usage On Windows:

```
C:\> set VK_LOADER_LAYERS_ENABLE=*api_dump,*validation
```

##### Example Usage On Linux/macOS:

```
$ export VK_LOADER_LAYERS_ENABLE=*api_dump,*validation
```

More info about the new layer filtering environment variables can be found in the `Layer Filtering` section of the
of the [Loader Layer Documentation](https://github.com/KhronosGroup/Vulkan-Loader/blob/main/docs/LoaderLayerInterface.md).

#### Older Loaders

Older Vulkan Desktop loaders will not accept the filtering environment variable, and so must continue using the original
`VK_INSTANCE_LAYERS` environment variable.

##### Example Usage On Windows:

The variable should include a semicolon-separated list of layer names to activate.

> Note that order is relevant, with the initial layer being the closest to the application, and the final layer being closest to the driver.

Reviewer 2: The relevance of order is mentioned only for the older loader configuration. If that's also true for a new loader the suggestion to specify this in that section too.

Author: Done

```
C:\> set VK_INSTANCE_LAYERS=VK_LAYER_LUNARG_api_dump;VK_LAYER_KHRONOS_validation
```

In this example, the api_dump layer will be called _before_ the Khronos validation layer.
`VK_INSTANCE_LAYERS` may also be set in the system environment variables.

##### Example Usage On Linux/macOS:

The variable should include a colon-separated list of layer names to activate.
Note that order is relevant, with the initial layer being the closest to the application, and the final layer being closest to the driver.

```
$ export VK_INSTANCE_LAYERS=VK_LAYER_LUNARG_api_dump:VK_LAYER_KHRONOS_validation
```

In this example, the api_dump layer will be called _before_ the Khronos validation layer.

### Layer Settings Environment Variables

Some settings from the settings file can also be set using environment variables. The settings that can be set using environment variables are listed in the documentation for each supported layer. If an environment variable is set, its value takes precedence over the value in the settings file.

The environment variable names for the layer settings have multiple variants that follows the format:

>    VK_`<`*`LayerVendor`*`>_`<`*`LayerName`*`>_<`*`setting_name`*`> which take precedent over:

Reviewer 2: some starts tunnel into the final document.

Vulkan layers can be configured using three different methods to match specific Vulkan developers' workflows:
- Using the Vulkan API: `vkCreateInstance()` and `VK_EXT_layer_settings`.
- Using the `vk_layer_settings.txt` file, that can be generated by the GUI interface called *[Vulkan Configurator](https://vulkan.lunarg.com/doc/sdk/latest/windows/vkconfig.html)*.
- Using environment variables.

These three methods are implemented by the **Vulkan Layer Settings** library part of the *[Vulkan-Utility-Libraries](https://github.com/KhronosGroup/Vulkan-Utility-Libraries)* repository.
Any layer project that uses this library will provide these three methods to control layer settings bringing consistency and easy of use of layers to the Vulkan community.

Configuring layers means multiple tasks: Enabling layers; Ordering layers; Configuring the layers capabilities. These three aspects are described with each method to configure layers.

Since a setting can be set via multiple methods here is the priority order:
1. Environment variable
2. vk_layer_settings.txt
3. `VK_EXT_layer_settings`

> **Guideline: Settings which are unknown by the layer will be ignored independently of the method. It's the reponsability of the layer developer to ensure backward compatibility with previous versions of the layer. This is to ensure the list of layer settings remain stable across versions and that the responsability of handling layer backward compatibility doesn't fall on Vulkan application developers as this could quickly become untrackable.**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Guideline: Settings which are unknown by the layer will be ignored independently of the method. It's the responsibility of the layer developer to ensure backward compatibility with previous versions of the layer. This is to ensure the list of layer settings remain stable across versions and that the responsibility of handling layer backward compatibility doesn't fall on Vulkan application developers as this could quickly become untrackable.**.
```

Author: Fixed thanks
